docs/source/users_guide/users_headers.rst, before:

.. currentmodule:: pyfits

************
FITS Headers
************

In the next three chapters, more detailed information as well as examples will
be explained for manipulating the header, the image data, and the table data
respectively.


Header of an HDU
================

Every HDU normally has two components: header and data. In PyFITS these two
components are accessed through the two attributes of the HDU,
:attr:`~_BaseHDU.header` and :attr:`~_BaseHDU.data`.

While an HDU may have empty data, i.e. the .data attribute is None, any HDU
will always have a header. When an HDU is created with a constructor, e.g.
``hdu = PrimaryHDU(data, header)``, the user may supply the header value from
an existing HDU's header and the data value from  a numpy array. If the
defaults (``None``) are used, the new HDU will have the minimal required
keywords for an HDU of that type:

    >>> hdu = pyfits.PrimaryHDU()
    >>> hdu.header # show the all of the header cards
    SIMPLE = T / conforms to FITS standard
    BITPIX = 8 / array data type
    NAXIS  = 0 / number of array dimensions
    EXTEND = T

A user can use any header and any data to construct a new HDU. PyFITS will
strip the required keywords from the input header first and then add back the
required keywords compatible to the new HDU.  So, a user can use a table HDU's
header to construct an image HDU and vice versa. The constructor will also
ensure the data type and dimension information in the header agree with the
data.


The Header Attribute
====================

Value Access, Updating, and Creating
------------------------------------

As shown in the Quick Tutorial, keyword values can be accessed via keyword name
or index of an HDU's header attribute. Here is a quick summary:

    >>> hdulist = pyfits.open('input.fits') # open a FITS file
    >>> prihdr = hdulist[0].header # the primary HDU header
    >>> print prihdr[3] # get the 4th keyword's value
    10
    >>> prihdr[3] = 20 # change its value
    >>> prihdr['DARKCORR']  # get the value of the keyword 'darkcorr'
    'OMIT'
    >>> prihdr['darkcorr'] = 'PERFORM'  # change darkcorr's value

Keyword names are case-insenstive except in a few special cases (see the
sections on HIERARCH card and record-valued cards). Thus, ``prihdr['abc']``,
``prihdr['ABC']``, or ``prihdr['aBc']`` are all equivalent.

Like with python :class:`dict`\s, new keywords can also be added to the header
using assignment syntax:

    >>> 'DARKCORR' in header  # Check for existence
    False
    >>> header['DARKCORR'] = 'OMIT'  # Add a new DARKCORR keyword

You can also add a new value *and* comment by assigning them as a tuple:

    >>> header['DARKCORR'] = ('OMIT', 'Dark Image Subtraction')

.. note::

    An important point to note when adding new keywords to a header is that by
    default they are not appended *immediately* to the end of the file.
    Rather, they are appended to the last non-commentary keyword.  This is in
    order to support the common use case of always having all HISTORY keywords
    grouped together at the end of a header.  A new non-commentary keyword will
    be added at the end of the existing keywords, but before any
    HISTORY/COMMENT keywords at the end of the header.

    There are a couple of ways to override this functionality:

    * Use the :meth:`Header.append` method with the ``end=True`` argument:

        >>> header.append(('DARKCORR', 'OMIT', 'Dark Image Subtraction'),
                          end=True)

      This forces the new keyword to be added at the actual end of the header.

    * The :meth:`Header.insert` method will always insert a new keyword exactly
      where you ask for it:

        >>> header.insert(20, ('DARKCORR', 'OMIT', 'Dark Image Subtraction'))

      This inserts the DARKCORR keyword before the 20th keyword in the header
      no matter what it is.

A keyword (and its corresponding card) can be deleted using the same index/name
syntax:

    >>> del prihdr[3] # delete the 2nd keyword
    >>> del prihdr['abc'] # get the value of the keyword 'abc'

Note that, like a regular Python list, the indexing updates after each delete,
so if ``del prihdr[3]`` is done two times in a row, the 4th and 5th keywords
are removed from the original header.  Likewise, ``del prihdr[-1]`` will delete
the last card in the header.

It is also possible to delete an entire range of cards using the slice syntax:

    >>> del prihdr[3:5]

The method :meth:`Header.set` is another way to update they value or comment
associated with an existing keyword, or to create a new keyword.  Most of its
functionality can be duplicated with the dict-like syntax shown above.  But in
some cases it might be more clear.  It also has the advantage of allowing one
to either move cards within the header, or specify the location of a new card
relative to existing cards:

    >>> prihdr.set('target', 'NGC1234', 'target name')
    >>> # place the next new keyword before the 'target' keyword
    >>> prihdr.set('newkey', 666, before='target') # comment is optional
    >>> # place the next new keyword after the 21st keyword
    >>> prihdr.set('newkey2', 42.0, 'another new key', after=20)

In FITS headers, each keyword may also have a comment associated with it
explaining its purpose.  The comments associated with each keyword are accessed
through the :attr:`~Header.comments` attribute:

    >>> header['NAXIS']
    2
    >>> header.comments['NAXIS']
    the number of image axes
    >>> header.comments['NAXIS'] = 'The number of image axes'  # Update

Comments can be accessed in all the same ways that values are accessed, whether
by keyword name or card index.  Slices are also possible.  The only difference
is that you go through ``header.comments`` instead of just ``header`` by
itself.


COMMENT, HISTORY, and Blank Keywords
------------------------------------

Most keywords in a FITS header have unique names. If there are more than two
cards sharing the same name, it is the first one accessed when referred by
name. The duplicates can only be accessed by numeric indexing.

There are three special keywords (their associated cards are sometimes referred
to as commentary cards), which commonly appear in FITS headers more than once.
They are (1) blank keyword, (2) HISTORY, and (3) COMMENT. Unlike other
keywords, when accessing these keywords they are returned as a list:

    >>> prihdr['history']
    I updated this file on 02/03/2011
    I updated this file on 02/04/2011
    ....

These lists can be sliced like any other list.  For example, to diplay just the
last HISTORY entry, use ``prihdr['history'][-1]``.  Existing commentary cards
can also be updated by using the appropriate index number for that card.

New commentary cards can be added like any other card by using the dict-like
keyword assignment syntax, or by using the :meth:`Header.set` method.  However,
unlike with other keywords, a new commentary card is always added and appended
to the last commentary card with the same keyword, rather than to the end of
the header. Here is an example:

    >>> hdu.header['history'] = 'history 1'
    >>> hdu.header[''] = 'blank 1'
    >>> hdu.header['comment'] = 'comment 1'
    >>> hdu.header['history'] = 'history 2'
    >>> hdu.header[''] = 'blank 2'
    >>> hdu.header['comment'] = 'comment 2'

and the part in the modified header becomes:

.. parsed-literal::

    HISTORY history 1
    HISTORY history 2
            blank 1
            blank 2
    COMMENT comment 1
    COMMENT comment 2


Users can also directly control exactly where in the header to add a new
commentary card by using the :meth:`Header.insert` method.

.. note::

    Ironically, there is no comment in a commentary card, only a string
    value.


Card Images
===========

A FITS header consists of card images.

A card image in a FITS header consists of a keyword name, a value, and
optionally a comment. Physically, it takes 80 columns (bytes)--without carriage
return--in a FITS file's storage format. In PyFITS, each card image is
manifested by a :class:`Card` object. There are also special kinds of cards:
commentary cards (see above) and card images taking more than one 80-column
card image.  The latter will be discussed later.

Most of the time the details of dealing with cards are handled by the
:class:`Header` object, and it is not necessary to directly manipulate cards.
In fact, most :class:`Header` methods that accept a (keyword, value) or
(keyword, value, comment) tuple as an argument can also take a :class:`Card`
object as an argument.  :class:`Card` objects are just wrappers around that
header that provide the logic for parsing and formatting individual cards in a
header.  But there's nothing gained by manually using a :class:`Card` object,
except to examine how a card might appear in a header before actually adding it
to the header.

A new Card object is created with the :class:`Card` constructor:
``Card(key, value, comment)``. For example:

    >>> c1 = pyfits.Card('temp', 80.0, 'temperature, floating value')
    >>> c2 = pyfits.Card('detector', 1) # comment is optional
    >>> c3 = pyfits.Card('mir_revr', True, 'mirror reversed? Boolean value')
    >>> c4 = pyfits.Card('abc', 2+3j, 'complex value')
    >>> c5 = pyfits.Card('observer', 'Hubble', 'string value')

    >>> print c1; print c2; print c3; print c4; print c5 # show the card images
    TEMP = 80.0 / temperature, floating value
    DETECTOR= 1 /
    MIR_REVR= T / mirror reversed? Boolean value
    ABC = (2.0, 3.0) / complex value
    OBSERVER= 'Hubble ' / string value

Cards have the attributes ``.keyword``, ``.value``, and ``.comment``. Both
``.value`` and ``.comment`` can be changed but not the ``.keyword`` attribute.

The :meth:`Card` constructor will check if the arguments given are conforming
to the FITS standard and has a fixed card image format. If the user wants to
create a card with a customized format or even a card which is not conforming
to the FITS standard (e.g. for testing purposes), the :meth:`Card.fromstring`
class method can be used.

Cards can be verified with :meth:`Card.verify`. The non-standard card ``c2`` in
the example below is flagged by such verification. More about verification in
PyFITS will be discussed in a later chapter.

    >>> c1 = pyfits.Card.fromstring('ABC = 3.456D023')
    >>> c2 = pyfits.Card.fromstring("P.I. ='Hubble'")
    >>> print c1; print c2
    ABC = 3.456D023
    P.I. ='Hubble'
    >>> c2.verify()
    Output verification result:
    Unfixable error: Illegal keyword name 'P.I.'

A list of the :class:`Card` objects underlying a :class:`Header` object can be
accessed with the :attr:`Header.cards` attribute.  This list is only meant for
observing, and should not be directly manipulated.  In fact, it is only a
copy--modifications to it will not affect the header it came from.  Use the
methods provided by the :class:`Header` class instead.


CONTINUE Cards
==============

The fact that the FITS standard only allows up to 8 characters for the keyword
name and 80 characters to contain the keyword, the value, and the comment is
restrictive for certain applications. To allow long string values for keywords,
a proposal was made in:

    http://legacy.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/heasarc/ofwg/docs/ofwg_recomm/r13.html

by using the CONTINUE keyword after the regular 80-column containing the
keyword. PyFITS does support this convention, even though it is not a FITS
standard. The examples below show the use of CONTINUE is automatic for long
string values.

    >>> header = pyfits.Header()
    >>> header['abc'] = 'abcdefg' * 20
    >>> header
    ABC = 'abcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcd&'
    CONTINUE 'efgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefga&'
    CONTINUE 'bcdefg&'
    >>> header['abc']
    'abcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefg'
    >>> # both value and comments are long
    >>> header['abc'] = ('abcdefg' * 10, 'abcdefg' * 10)
    >>> header
    ABC = 'abcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcd&'
    CONTINUE 'efg&'
    CONTINUE '&' / abcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefga
    CONTINUE '&' / bcdefg

Note that when a CONTINUE card is used, at the end of each 80-characters card
image, an ampersand is present. The ampersand is not part of the string value.
Also, there is no "=" at the 9th column after CONTINUE. In the first example,
the entire 240 characters is treated by PyFITS as a single card. So, if it is
the nth card in a header, the (n+1)th card refers to the next keyword, not the
next CONTINUE card.  As such, CONTINUE cards are transparently handled by
PyFITS as a single logical card, and it's generally not necessary to worry
about the details of the format.  Keywords that resolve to a set of CONTINUE
cards can be accessed and updated just like regular keywords.


HIERARCH Cards
==============

For keywords longer than 8 characters, there is a convention originated at ESO
to facilitate such use. It uses a special keyword HIERARCH with the actual long
keyword following. PyFITS supports this convention as well.

If a keyword contains more than 8 characters PyFITS will automatically use a
HIERARCH card, but will also issue a warning in case this is in error.
However, one may explicitly request a HIERARCH card by prepending the keyword
with 'HIERARCH ' (just as it would appear in the header).  For example,
``header['HIERARCH abcdefghi']`` will create the keyword ``abcdefghi`` without
displaying a warning.  Once created, HIERARCH keywords can be accessed like any
other: ``header['abcdefghi']``, without prepending 'HIERARCH' to the keyword.
HIEARARCH keywords also differ from normal FITS keywords in that they are
case-sensitive.

Examples follow:

    >>> c = pyfits.Card('abcdefghi', 10)
    Keyword name 'abcdefghi' is greater than 8 characters; a HIERARCH card will
    be created.
    >>> print c
    HIERARCH abcdefghi = 10
    >>> c = pyfits.Card('hierarch abcdefghi', 10)
    >>> print c
    HIERARCH abcdefghi = 10
    >>> h = pyfits.PrimaryHDU()
    >>> h.header['hierarch abcdefghi'] =  99
    >>> h.header['abcdefghi']
    99
    >>> h.header['abcdefghi'] = 10
    >>> h.header['abcdefghi']
    10
    >>> h.header['ABCDEFGHI']
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
      File "pyfits/header.py", line 121, in __getitem__
        return self._cards[self._cardindex(key)].value
      File "pyfits/header.py", line 1106, in _cardindex
        raise KeyError("Keyword %r not found." % keyword)
    KeyError: "Keyword 'ABCDEFGI.' not found."
    >>> h.header
    SIMPLE = T / conforms to FITS standard
    BITPIX = 8 / array data type
    NAXIS = 0 / number of array dimensions
    EXTEND = T
    HIERARCH abcdefghi = 1000

.. note::

    A final point to keep in mind about the :class:`Header` class is that much
    of its design is intended to abstract away quirks about the FITS format.
    This is why, for example, it will automatically created CONTINUE and
    HIEARARCH cards.  The Header is just a data structure, and as user you
    shouldn't have to worry about how it ultimately gets serialized to a header
    in a FITS file.

    Though there are some areas where it's almost impossible to hide away the
    quirks of the FITS format, PyFITS tries to make it so that you have to
    think about it as little as possible.  If there are any areas where you
    have concern yourself unncessarily about how the header is constructed,
    then let help@stsci.edu know, as there are probably areas where this can be
    improved on even more.

Commit message:

This adds a new appendix section to the docs, which includes copy of the FAQ and the changelog, and has the new header transition guide.
Squashed commit of the following:

commit f203478e8fb922efad790a6bc154a4281d0e1975
Author: Erik Bray <embray@stsci.edu>
Date:   Wed May 23 18:29:04 2012 -0400

    Finished filling in most of what I want to write for the header guide

commit e2aa4254755f31be4bb145dbb08ec72b5b3cfdd2
Author: Erik Bray <embray@stsci.edu>
Date:   Wed May 23 13:47:25 2012 -0400

    Finished the commentary card viewing paragraph, now that that actually works :)

commit 2aae2e54077655d3ba571adc1570501a184dcd94
Author: Erik Bray <embray@stsci.edu>
Date:   Wed May 23 12:48:03 2012 -0400

    Started adding some details about commentary card viewing...but hit a snag when I realized commentary card slicing is actually broken (it shouldn't be).

commit f7c2215d0b8e0bdba13dd5cf3e1ce85435fcc576
Author: Erik Bray <embray@stsci.edu>
Date:   Wed May 23 12:47:09 2012 -0400

    Started adding the header transition guide.  Also added a new Appendix section to the docs, which includes the changelog and the FAQ.

commit 8f6e45e29375e0ed6d646a056f166314f827c8b6
Author: Erik Bray <embray@stsci.edu>
Date:   Wed May 23 13:43:09 2012 -0400

    commentary card slicing still wasn't quite right.  It didn't return a new _HeaderCommentaryCards object for the correct commentary keyword, and with the correct slice applied.  Added some new internal bookkeeping so that each _HeaderCommentaryCards object knows how it should be sliced.

commit 2b83cc753840f5023a39b33a75dc76d0a956a3f4
Author: Erik Bray <embray@stsci.edu>
Date:   Wed May 23 13:12:39 2012 -0400

    Fixes and adds a test for header commentary slicing.

commit d6dbe5bbc8c447ebe63a2f14755eddd5c010a50b
Author: Erik Bray <embray@stsci.edu>
Date:   Tue May 22 16:39:25 2012 -0400

    Slight rewording in the docs

git-svn-id: http://svn6.assembla.com/svn/pyfits/trunk@1622 ed100bfc-0583-0410-97f2-c26b58777a21

docs/source/users_guide/users_headers.rst, after:

.. currentmodule:: pyfits

************
FITS Headers
************

In the next three chapters, more detailed information as well as examples will
be explained for manipulating the header, the image data, and the table data
respectively.

.. note::

    The Header interface was significantly reworked in PyFITS 3.1.  This
    documentation addresses the interface as it works in PyFITS 3.1, though
    should still be *mostly* the same for earlier PyFITS versions.  See the
    :ref:`header-transition-guide` for a complete detailing on the difference
    between PyFITS 3.1 and the earlier Header interface.  This guide may also
    be useful to advanced users wishing to better understand how the Header
    interface is implemented.


Header of an HDU
================

Every HDU normally has two components: header and data. In PyFITS these two
components are accessed through the two attributes of the HDU,
:attr:`~_BaseHDU.header` and :attr:`~_BaseHDU.data`.

While an HDU may have empty data, i.e. the .data attribute is None, any HDU
will always have a header. When an HDU is created with a constructor, e.g.
``hdu = PrimaryHDU(data, header)``, the user may supply the header value from
an existing HDU's header and the data value from  a numpy array. If the
defaults (``None``) are used, the new HDU will have the minimal required
keywords for an HDU of that type:

    >>> hdu = pyfits.PrimaryHDU()
    >>> hdu.header # show the all of the header cards
    SIMPLE = T / conforms to FITS standard
    BITPIX = 8 / array data type
    NAXIS  = 0 / number of array dimensions
    EXTEND = T

A user can use any header and any data to construct a new HDU. PyFITS will
strip the required keywords from the input header first and then add back the
required keywords compatible to the new HDU.  So, a user can use a table HDU's
header to construct an image HDU and vice versa. The constructor will also
ensure the data type and dimension information in the header agree with the
data.


The Header Attribute
====================

Value Access, Updating, and Creating
------------------------------------

As shown in the Quick Tutorial, keyword values can be accessed via keyword name
or index of an HDU's header attribute. Here is a quick summary:

    >>> hdulist = pyfits.open('input.fits') # open a FITS file
    >>> prihdr = hdulist[0].header # the primary HDU header
    >>> print prihdr[3] # get the 4th keyword's value
    10
    >>> prihdr[3] = 20 # change its value
    >>> prihdr['DARKCORR']  # get the value of the keyword 'darkcorr'
    'OMIT'
    >>> prihdr['darkcorr'] = 'PERFORM'  # change darkcorr's value

Keyword names are case-insenstive except in a few special cases (see the
sections on HIERARCH card and record-valued cards). Thus, ``prihdr['abc']``,
``prihdr['ABC']``, or ``prihdr['aBc']`` are all equivalent.

Like with python :class:`dict`\s, new keywords can also be added to the header
using assignment syntax:

    >>> 'DARKCORR' in header  # Check for existence
    False
    >>> header['DARKCORR'] = 'OMIT'  # Add a new DARKCORR keyword

You can also add a new value *and* comment by assigning them as a tuple:

    >>> header['DARKCORR'] = ('OMIT', 'Dark Image Subtraction')

.. note::

    An important point to note when adding new keywords to a header is that by
    default they are not appended *immediately* to the end of the file.
    Rather, they are appended to the last non-commentary keyword.  This is in
    order to support the common use case of always having all HISTORY keywords
    grouped together at the end of a header.  A new non-commentary keyword will
    be added at the end of the existing keywords, but before any
    HISTORY/COMMENT keywords at the end of the header.

    There are a couple of ways to override this functionality:

    * Use the :meth:`Header.append` method with the ``end=True`` argument:

        >>> header.append(('DARKCORR', 'OMIT', 'Dark Image Subtraction'),
                          end=True)

      This forces the new keyword to be added at the actual end of the header.

    * The :meth:`Header.insert` method will always insert a new keyword exactly
      where you ask for it:

        >>> header.insert(20, ('DARKCORR', 'OMIT', 'Dark Image Subtraction'))

      This inserts the DARKCORR keyword before the 20th keyword in the header
      no matter what it is.

A keyword (and its corresponding card) can be deleted using the same index/name
syntax:

    >>> del prihdr[3] # delete the 2nd keyword
    >>> del prihdr['abc'] # get the value of the keyword 'abc'

Note that, like a regular Python list, the indexing updates after each delete,
so if ``del prihdr[3]`` is done two times in a row, the 4th and 5th keywords
are removed from the original header.  Likewise, ``del prihdr[-1]`` will delete
the last card in the header.

It is also possible to delete an entire range of cards using the slice syntax:

    >>> del prihdr[3:5]

The method :meth:`Header.set` is another way to update they value or comment
associated with an existing keyword, or to create a new keyword.  Most of its
functionality can be duplicated with the dict-like syntax shown above.  But in
some cases it might be more clear.  It also has the advantage of allowing one
to either move cards within the header, or specify the location of a new card
relative to existing cards:

    >>> prihdr.set('target', 'NGC1234', 'target name')
    >>> # place the next new keyword before the 'target' keyword
    >>> prihdr.set('newkey', 666, before='target') # comment is optional
    >>> # place the next new keyword after the 21st keyword
    >>> prihdr.set('newkey2', 42.0, 'another new key', after=20)

In FITS headers, each keyword may also have a comment associated with it
explaining its purpose.  The comments associated with each keyword are accessed
through the :attr:`~Header.comments` attribute:

    >>> header['NAXIS']
    2
    >>> header.comments['NAXIS']
    the number of image axes
    >>> header.comments['NAXIS'] = 'The number of image axes'  # Update

Comments can be accessed in all the same ways that values are accessed, whether
by keyword name or card index.  Slices are also possible.  The only difference
is that you go through ``header.comments`` instead of just ``header`` by
itself.


COMMENT, HISTORY, and Blank Keywords
------------------------------------

Most keywords in a FITS header have unique names. If there are more than two
cards sharing the same name, it is the first one accessed when referred by
name. The duplicates can only be accessed by numeric indexing.

There are three special keywords (their associated cards are sometimes referred
to as commentary cards), which commonly appear in FITS headers more than once.
They are (1) blank keyword, (2) HISTORY, and (3) COMMENT. Unlike other
keywords, when accessing these keywords they are returned as a list:

    >>> prihdr['HISTORY']
    I updated this file on 02/03/2011
    I updated this file on 02/04/2011
    ....

These lists can be sliced like any other list.  For example, to diplay just the
last HISTORY entry, use ``prihdr['history'][-1]``.  Existing commentary cards
can also be updated by using the appropriate index number for that card.

New commentary cards can be added like any other card by using the dict-like
keyword assignment syntax, or by using the :meth:`Header.set` method.  However,
unlike with other keywords, a new commentary card is always added and appended
to the last commentary card with the same keyword, rather than to the end of
the header. Here is an example:

    >>> hdu.header['HISTORY'] = 'history 1'
    >>> hdu.header[''] = 'blank 1'
    >>> hdu.header['COMMENT'] = 'comment 1'
    >>> hdu.header['HISTORY'] = 'history 2'
    >>> hdu.header[''] = 'blank 2'
    >>> hdu.header['COMMENT'] = 'comment 2'

and the part in the modified header becomes:

.. parsed-literal::

    HISTORY history 1
    HISTORY history 2
            blank 1
            blank 2
    COMMENT comment 1
    COMMENT comment 2


Users can also directly control exactly where in the header to add a new
commentary card by using the :meth:`Header.insert` method.

.. note::

    Ironically, there is no comment in a commentary card, only a string
    value.


Card Images
===========

A FITS header consists of card images.

A card image in a FITS header consists of a keyword name, a value, and
optionally a comment. Physically, it takes 80 columns (bytes)--without carriage
return--in a FITS file's storage format. In PyFITS, each card image is
manifested by a :class:`Card` object. There are also special kinds of cards:
commentary cards (see above) and card images taking more than one 80-column
card image.  The latter will be discussed later.

Most of the time the details of dealing with cards are handled by the
:class:`Header` object, and it is not necessary to directly manipulate cards.
In fact, most :class:`Header` methods that accept a (keyword, value) or
(keyword, value, comment) tuple as an argument can also take a :class:`Card`
object as an argument.  :class:`Card` objects are just wrappers around that
header that provide the logic for parsing and formatting individual cards in a
header.  But there's nothing gained by manually using a :class:`Card` object,
except to examine how a card might appear in a header before actually adding it
to the header.

A new Card object is created with the :class:`Card` constructor:
``Card(key, value, comment)``. For example:

    >>> c1 = pyfits.Card('TEMP', 80.0, 'temperature, floating value')
    >>> c2 = pyfits.Card('DETECTOR', 1) # comment is optional
    >>> c3 = pyfits.Card('MIR_REVR', True, 'mirror reversed? Boolean value')
    >>> c4 = pyfits.Card('ABC', 2+3j, 'complex value')
    >>> c5 = pyfits.Card('OBSERVER', 'Hubble', 'string value')

    >>> print c1; print c2; print c3; print c4; print c5 # show the card images
    TEMP = 80.0 / temperature, floating value
    DETECTOR= 1 /
    MIR_REVR= T / mirror reversed? Boolean value
    ABC = (2.0, 3.0) / complex value
    OBSERVER= 'Hubble ' / string value

Cards have the attributes ``.keyword``, ``.value``, and ``.comment``. Both
``.value`` and ``.comment`` can be changed but not the ``.keyword`` attribute.

The :meth:`Card` constructor will check if the arguments given are conforming
to the FITS standard and has a fixed card image format. If the user wants to
create a card with a customized format or even a card which is not conforming
to the FITS standard (e.g. for testing purposes), the :meth:`Card.fromstring`
class method can be used.

Cards can be verified with :meth:`Card.verify`. The non-standard card ``c2`` in
the example below is flagged by such verification. More about verification in
PyFITS will be discussed in a later chapter.

    >>> c1 = pyfits.Card.fromstring('ABC = 3.456D023')
    >>> c2 = pyfits.Card.fromstring("P.I. ='Hubble'")
    >>> print c1; print c2
    ABC = 3.456D023
    P.I. ='Hubble'
    >>> c2.verify()
    Output verification result:
    Unfixable error: Illegal keyword name 'P.I.'

A list of the :class:`Card` objects underlying a :class:`Header` object can be
accessed with the :attr:`Header.cards` attribute.  This list is only meant for
observing, and should not be directly manipulated.  In fact, it is only a
copy--modifications to it will not affect the header it came from.  Use the
methods provided by the :class:`Header` class instead.


CONTINUE Cards
==============

The fact that the FITS standard only allows up to 8 characters for the keyword
name and 80 characters to contain the keyword, the value, and the comment is
restrictive for certain applications. To allow long string values for keywords,
a proposal was made in:

    http://legacy.gsfc.nasa.gov/docs/heasarc/ofwg/docs/ofwg_recomm/r13.html

by using the CONTINUE keyword after the regular 80-column containing the
keyword. PyFITS does support this convention, even though it is not a FITS
standard. The examples below show the use of CONTINUE is automatic for long
string values.

    >>> header = pyfits.Header()
    >>> header['abc'] = 'abcdefg' * 20
    >>> header
    ABC = 'abcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcd&'
    CONTINUE 'efgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefga&'
    CONTINUE 'bcdefg&'
    >>> header['abc']
    'abcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefg'
    >>> # both value and comments are long
    >>> header['abc'] = ('abcdefg' * 10, 'abcdefg' * 10)
    >>> header
    ABC = 'abcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcd&'
    CONTINUE 'efg&'
    CONTINUE '&' / abcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefgabcdefga
    CONTINUE '&' / bcdefg

Note that when a CONTINUE card is used, at the end of each 80-characters card
image, an ampersand is present. The ampersand is not part of the string value.
Also, there is no "=" at the 9th column after CONTINUE. In the first example,
the entire 240 characters is treated by PyFITS as a single card. So, if it is
the nth card in a header, the (n+1)th card refers to the next keyword, not the
next CONTINUE card.  As such, CONTINUE cards are transparently handled by
PyFITS as a single logical card, and it's generally not necessary to worry
about the details of the format.  Keywords that resolve to a set of CONTINUE
cards can be accessed and updated just like regular keywords.


HIERARCH Cards
==============

For keywords longer than 8 characters, there is a convention originated at ESO
to facilitate such use. It uses a special keyword HIERARCH with the actual long
keyword following. PyFITS supports this convention as well.

If a keyword contains more than 8 characters PyFITS will automatically use a
HIERARCH card, but will also issue a warning in case this is in error.
However, one may explicitly request a HIERARCH card by prepending the keyword
with 'HIERARCH ' (just as it would appear in the header).  For example,
``header['HIERARCH abcdefghi']`` will create the keyword ``abcdefghi`` without
displaying a warning.  Once created, HIERARCH keywords can be accessed like any
other: ``header['abcdefghi']``, without prepending 'HIERARCH' to the keyword.
HIEARARCH keywords also differ from normal FITS keywords in that they are
case-sensitive.

Examples follow:

    >>> c = pyfits.Card('abcdefghi', 10)
    Keyword name 'abcdefghi' is greater than 8 characters; a HIERARCH card will
    be created.
    >>> print c
    HIERARCH abcdefghi = 10
    >>> c = pyfits.Card('hierarch abcdefghi', 10)
    >>> print c
    HIERARCH abcdefghi = 10
    >>> h = pyfits.PrimaryHDU()
    >>> h.header['hierarch abcdefghi'] =  99
    >>> h.header['abcdefghi']
    99
    >>> h.header['abcdefghi'] = 10
    >>> h.header['abcdefghi']
    10
    >>> h.header['ABCDEFGHI']
    Traceback (most recent call last):
      File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
      File "pyfits/header.py", line 121, in __getitem__
        return self._cards[self._cardindex(key)].value
      File "pyfits/header.py", line 1106, in _cardindex
        raise KeyError("Keyword %r not found." % keyword)
    KeyError: "Keyword 'ABCDEFGI.' not found."
    >>> h.header
    SIMPLE = T / conforms to FITS standard
    BITPIX = 8 / array data type
    NAXIS = 0 / number of array dimensions
    EXTEND = T
    HIERARCH abcdefghi = 1000

.. note::

    A final point to keep in mind about the :class:`Header` class is that much
    of its design is intended to abstract away quirks about the FITS format.
    This is why, for example, it will automatically created CONTINUE and
    HIEARARCH cards.  The Header is just a data structure, and as user you
    shouldn't have to worry about how it ultimately gets serialized to a header
    in a FITS file.

    Though there are some areas where it's almost impossible to hide away the
    quirks of the FITS format, PyFITS tries to make it so that you have to
    think about it as little as possible.  If there are any areas where you
    have concern yourself unncessarily about how the header is constructed,
    then let help@stsci.edu know, as there are probably areas where this can be
    improved on even more.
